# 8.1 Energy Sources

## 1. Specific Energy and Energy Types

### Specific Energy

Specific Energy, $E_\text{s}$, is the amount of energy that can be extracted from a unit mass of fuel; it is measured in $\text{J kg}^{-1}$

Energy Density, $E_\text{d}$, is the amount of energy that can be extracted from a unit volume of fuel; it is measured in $\text{J m}^{-3}$

The relationship between specific energy and energy density is:

$E_\text{d} = ρE_\text{s}$

### Non Renewable and Renewable Energy

- Non-renewable energy sources are finite sources, which are being depleted much faster than they can be produced
- Renewable sources can be replenished in a reasonable human time scale.
- Energy Degradation: The fact that energy, while conserving, becomes less useful for performing mechanical work

## Law of Thermodynamics
### The First Law of Thermodynamics

The **first law of thermodynamics** (law of conservation of energy) states that the change in the internal energy of a system is equal to the sum of the heat added to the system and the work done on it.

### The Second Law of Thermodynamics

The **second law of thermodynamics** states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease over time, and is constant if and only if all processes are reversible. 

## 2. Producing Energy
### Solar Power:

- Solar heating panel converts solar energy from the Sun into thermal energy. Cold water flows into the panel and hot water flows out. 
- Uses: heating and hot water

### Wind Power:

- Tower to support rotating blades
- Blades that can be rotated to face the wind
- Generator
- Storage system or connection to a distribution grid

$m = ρV = ρAd = ρπr^2vt$

- $m$: mass of air
- $ρ$: density of air
- $A$: cross-sectional area
- $d$: length of the cylinder
- $r$: radius of the cylinder
- $v$: speed of the wind
- $t$: time

$\displaystyle E_k = \frac{1}{2} mv^{2} = \frac{1}{2} \rho Av^{3}t= \frac{1}{2} ρπr^2v^3t$

$\displaystyle P = \frac{E_{k}}{t} = \frac{1}{2} ρAv^3 = \frac{1}{2} ρπr^2v^3$

This shows that the power carried by the wind is proportional to the cube of the speed of air.
#### Why is it impossible to extract all power from the air?

- The speed of air cannot drop to zero after impact with blades.
- Frictional losses in the generator and turbulence around blades.

#### Why are turbines not placed near one another?

- Less KE is available for the next turbine.
- Turbulence reduces the efficiency of the next turbine

## Key Formulas

### Specific Energy Density

$E_\text{d} = ρE_\text{s}$

### Wind turbine energy production

$\displaystyle P = \frac{E_{k}}{t} = \frac{1}{2} ρAv^3 = \frac{1}{2} ρπr^2v^3$
