# 8.2 Thermal Energy Transfer

## 1. Heat Transfer

The **internal energy** of an object refers to the total of microscopic random kinetic energy and the potential energy between the particles (atoms and molecules) that make up the material. In polyatomic gases, there may also be rotational and vibrational energy within the molecules.

**Thermal energy**, on the other hand, specifically refers to the kinetic energy component of an object's internal energy.

### 1. Conduction

- Higher average kinetic energy.
- Free electrons collide with neighboring molecules.
- Molecules are vibrating.

#### Heat flow equation:

- The rate of heat flow $dQ/dt$ is directly proportional to the cross-sectional area $A$, temperature difference $T$
- It is inversely proportional to the length of $L$.

$\displaystyle \frac{dQ}{dt} = kA \frac{T}{L}$

### 2. Convection

- Air with different temperatures transfers in a different direction.
- Black-body radiation: The power a body radiates depends on its surface area $A$ and the absolute temperature of the surface $T$.

$P = \text{e}\sigma AT^4$

where:

$\sigma$: Boltzmann constant $5.67 \times 10^{-8} \text{ Wm}^{-2} \text{ K}^{-4}$ 
$A$: cross-sectional area
$T$: temperature in Kelvin
$\text{e}$: emissivity, when $\text{e}=1$ we call the body a black body. This is a theoretical body, a perfect radiator.

**Emissivity** is the ratio of the energy radiated from a material's surface to that radiated from a **blackbody** (a perfect emitter) at the same temperature and wavelength and under the same viewing condition.

$\displaystyle \text{e} = \frac{P\space(\text{radiated})}{P(\space\text{radiated by blackbody})}$

Consider the body of emissivity $\text{e}$ and surface temp $T$ whose surroundings have a temperature $T_s$. The net rate at which energy leaves the body is:

$P = e\sigma A(T^4-T_s^4)$

### PHET simulation:

- [Black-body spectrum](https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/blackbody-spectrum/latest/blackbody-spectrum_en.html):

Source `HTML5`:

```HTML[]
<iframe src="https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/blackbody-spectrum/latest/blackbody-spectrum_en.html"
        width="800"
        height="600"
        allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
```

<iframe src="https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/blackbody-spectrum/latest/blackbody-spectrum_en.html"
        width="700"
        height="500"
        allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

(Source: PhET Simulation)

### Wien's Displacement Law:

The energy a body radiates is electromagnetic radiation distributed over an infinite range of wavelengths. However, the maximum amount of energy is radiated at a specific wavelength, $\lambda_{\text{max}}$ that is determined by the body's temperature.

$\displaystyle \lambda_{\text{max}} = \frac{2.90 \times 10^{-3}}{T}$

## 2. Solar Radiation
### The Solar Constant

The **solar constant** $= 1.36\text{ kW⋅m}^{−2}$, is the mean solar radiant power per unit area (the intensity) perpendicular to solar rays arriving at the top of the atmosphere of the Earth. All types of electromagnetic radiation are included, not just visible light.

The solar constant is derived from the intensity formula:

$\displaystyle I = \frac{P}{4\pi d^2}$

where $I$ is the intensity, $P$ is the power, and $d$ is the diameter.

### Albedo

Let's discuss the radiation reflected by the Earth and its atmosphere. Good radiation absorbers are also good emitters, known as black bodies. This means that absorptivity and emissivity are the same.

The complement of this absorptivity is called **albedo**. The albedo, $α$, of a body, is defined as the ratio of the power of radiation scattered from a body to the total power incident on the body:

$\displaystyle \text{albedo} = \frac{(\text{Total scattering power})}{(\text{Total incident power})}$

#### Factors that affect the albedo:

- Material
- Season
- Cloud cover
- Latitude
- Surface conditions

### Intensity

The intensity reaching the planet's surface varies from different albedo values:

$I = S-αS = (1-α)S$

where $\alpha$ is the albedo,

The intensity is incident on an area equal to $\pi R^2$ where $R$ is the earth's radius. However, the radiation is shared over a total area of $4\pi R^2$ over one day.

Hence,

$\displaystyle \overline{I} = \frac{(1-α)S\pi R^{2}}{4\pi R^{2}} = \frac{(1-α)S}{4}$

**Note:** Energy is always balanced when temperature is constant, where

$E_{\text{out}} = E_{\text{in}}$

### Example Question

$α = 0.3, I = 245, \text{e} = 1(\text{blackbody})$

$\displaystyle \text{Power in} = \frac{(1-α)S}{4} A = eσAT^4 = \text{Power out}$\
$\therefore \displaystyle \frac{(1-α)S}{4} = eσT^4$

$245 = 5.67\times10^{-8} \times T^4$\
$T = 256\text{K}$

Comment: Relative low

### The Greenhouse Effect:

The greenhouse effect is said to "trap heat" making the planet's surface warmer than without a greenhouse effect. The process has 4 basic steps:
- sunlight is NOT strongly absorbed and passes through the atmosphere to heat the surface
- the surface warms and emits longwave radiation
- the atmosphere absorbs most longwave radiation emitted by the surface
- the atmosphere re-radiates some longwave radiation back toward the surface

## Key Formulas

### Heat Transfer

$\displaystyle \frac{dQ}{dt} = kA \frac{T}{L}$

$P = \text{e}\sigma AT^4$

### Solar Radiation

$\displaystyle I = \frac{P}{4\pi d^2}$

$I = S-αS = (1-α)S$

$\displaystyle \overline{I} = \frac{(1-α)S\pi R^{2}}{4\pi R^{2}} = \frac{(1-α)S}{4}$

$\displaystyle \text{albedo} = \frac{(\text{Total scattering power})}{(\text{Total incident power})}$
